Releases
********

Release cycle
=============

0. release every 3 months (at time ``T``)
1. ``T-11`` weeks: ``all`` add your favorite Issues to the next-rel column
2. ``T-10`` weeks: ``Scrum Master`` prep dev meet (internal)

   * Update/trim next-release column in Kanban
   * Prepare agenda, include possible additions not covered by Kanban/Issues
   * Add milestone tags (nextver, nextver+1, etc.)
   * Add highlighted new features to RELEASE_NOTES.md
3. ``T-8`` weeks: ``Release Manager`` dev meet (external/public)

   * Use Kanban as starter
   * Move issues around based on input
   * Add milestone tags, for this release or future releases
   * Update highlighted new features to RELEASE_NOTES.md
4. ``T-1``: ``all`` reserve week for wrapping up PRs and review.
5. ``T±0``: ``Release Manager`` release!

   * Have a look at Python release schedule, and time Arbor release optimally with new Python minor version. It is nice to generate wheels for the new minor as soon as minor is released.
6. ``T+1`` weeks: ``Scrum Master`` retrospective
   
   * set date for next release

Procedure
=========

These notes enumerate the steps required every time we release a new
version of Arbor.

Pre-release
-----------

Update tags/versions and test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. Check if some files are up to date
    
   - README.md, ATTRIBUTIONS.md, CONTRIBUTING.md, CHANGELOG.md
   - Verify MANIFEST.in (required for PyPI sdist)
   - Double check that all examples/tutorials/etc are covered by CI
   - Check Python/pip/PyPi metadata and scripts, e.g. ``setup.py``, ``pyproject.toml``

#. Create new temp-branch ending in ``-rc``. E.g. ``v0.6-rc``
#. Bump the ``VERSION`` file:

   - See also :ref:`dev-version`
   - Append ``-rc``. (Make sure there's no ``-dev``)

#. Create a draft PR. Tag and push with ``-rc``. E.g. ``v0.6-rc``

   - on cmdline: ``git tag -a TAGNAME``
   - ``git push upstream refs/tags/TAGNAME``
   - Githubs autogenerated release notes can only be generated on a tag. Use this ``-rc`` tag to do so, and add the commit to the draft PR. Ensure Github takes the previous release as base.

#. Run and pass all tests.

   - They should run automatically based on the draft PR. Pushing the tag kicks of ``ciwheel``.
   - In case you want to test ``ciwheel.yml`` manually on your local repo ``origin``, push to a branch called ``ciwheel``, e.g. ``git push origin HEAD:ciwheel``.
   
      - ``ciwheel.yml`` pushes automatically to `Test.PyPI.org <https://test.pypi.org/project/arbor/>`_. This only passes if ran as branch of the main ``arbor-sim`` repo (as that's where the PyPI secret lives). On your own repo, the upload will fail (the rest should pass). If you want to test uploading, then force push to the _upstream_ ``ciwheel`` branch, e.g. ``git push upstream HEAD:ciwheel --force``.
   
   - If you want to test the PyPI submission (consider asking other OS-users):

     .. code-block:: bash

        python -m venv env && source env/bin/activate
        pip install numpy
        pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ arbor #should select the latest build, otherwise e.g. arbor==0.8rc0
        python -c 'import arbor; print(arbor.__config__)'

   - Use build flags to test the source package: :ref:`in_python_adv`

Release
-------

#. Make sure no errors were encountered in the pre-release phase, working wheels were produced, and were installable from `Test.PyPI.org <https://test.pypi.org/project/arbor/>`_ and that no problems were reported.
   
#. Change ``VERSION``. Make sure does not end with ``-rc`` or ``-dev``.

#. Merge the PR.

#. Tag

   - commit and either reuse the draft PR for the RC, or open a new one.
   - once merged, make and push tag.

      - on cmdline: ``git tag -a TAGNAME``
      - ``git push upstream TAGNAME``

#. Upload to pypi & verify

   Get the wheels from test PyPI or the Github Action that produced the release artifacts.

   .. code-block:: bash

      twine upload -r arborpypi dist/*

      python -m venv env && source env/bin/activate
      pip install arbor
      python -c 'import arbor; print(arbor.__config__)'

#. Create Github Release: https://github.com/arbor-sim/arbor/releases

   - The Github action that produced the release artifacts should have prepared a draft Release.
   - If not:
   - Go to `GH tags`_ and click “…” and “Create release”
   - Categorize/edit Github's autogenerated release notes (alternatively go through merged PRs to come up with a changelog).
   - Manually build full tarball:

   ``scripts/create_tarball ~/loc/of/arbor tagname outputfile``

   - eg ``scripts/create_tarball /full/path/to/arbor v0.5.1 ~/arbor-v0.5.1-full.tar.gz``

Post Release
------------

#. Place the Github generated release notes in ``CHANGELOG``.

#. Start a new release on Zenodo, this allocated a DOI, but you don't have to finish it right away. Add new Zenodo badge/link to docs/README.

#. Update Zenodo with authors and changelog created in previous step and submit.

#. Make a new PR setting ``VERSION`` to the next with a trailing ``-dev``. E.g. if you just release ``3.14``, change ``VERSION`` to ``3.15-dev``

   - Update ``spack/package.py``. The checksum of the targz is the sha256sum.
   - Include changes such as to ``CITATIONS``, ``doc/index.rst`` in postrel PR. Copy Zenodo BibTex export to ``CITATIONS``.

#. Update ``scripts/check-all-tags.sh`` to check the current tag.

#. Update spack package / Ebrains Lab / Opensourcebrain

   - Spack upstream: `PR here <https://github.com/spack/spack/blob/develop/var/spack/repos/builtin/packages/arbor/package.py>`_
   - Ebrains Lab: `MR here <https://gitlab.ebrains.eu/technical-coordination/project-internal/devops/platform/ebrains-spack-builds/>`_
   - OSB: update `requirementsfile <https://github.com/OpenSourceBrain/OSBv2/blob/master/applications/jupyterlab/requirements.txt>`_ if needed.

     - Make sure that `Notebooks <https://www.v2.opensourcebrain.org/repositories/38>`_ work on the version that their image is built with.

#. Announce on our website
#. Announce on HBP newsletter newsletter@humanbrainproject.eu, HBP Twitter/socials evan.hancock@ebrains.eu
#. [AUTOMATED] Add tagged version of docs on ReadTheDocs
#. HBP internal admin

   - Plus: https://plus.humanbrainproject.eu/components/2691/
   - TC Wiki: https://wiki.ebrains.eu/bin/view/Collabs/technical-coordination/EBRAINS%20components/Arbor/
   - KG: https://search.kg.ebrains.eu/instances/5cf4e24b-b0eb-4d05-96e5-a7751134a061
 
     - Update howto: https://wiki.ebrains.eu/bin/view/Collabs/swc-guide#HHowtoupdateexistingSoftwareinstances
     - tldr: shoot your ticket here: curation-support@humanbrainproject.eu
     - Supported file formats
 
       - ContentTypes: https://humanbrainproject.github.io/openMINDS/v3/core/v4/data/contentType.html
       - details: https://github.com/HumanBrainProject/openMINDS_core/tree/v3/instances/data/contentTypes
 
   - Send an update to the folk in charge of HBP Twitter if we want to shout about it

#. FZJ admin

   - https://juser.fz-juelich.de/submit

GUI
===

Release automation is a bit more advanced for Arbor GUI: the act of pushing a new tag, auto-drafts a release with the relevant artifacts.
The post release steps mentioned above are largely the same. A list of the places where an update must be entered:

#. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7415129
#. https://plus.humanbrainproject.eu/components/3178

.. _GH tags: https://github.com/arbor-sim/arbor/tags
.. _AUTOMATED: https://github.com/arbor-sim/arbor/blob/master/.github/workflows/ebrains.yml 
